---
title: "A Bayesian Spatiotemporal Nowcasting Model for Public Health
Decision-Making and Surveillance"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/ajoe_2022
excerpt: 
date: 2022-02-28
venue: 'American Journal of Epidemiology'
paperurl: 
citation: 
---

Abstract: As coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) spread through the United States in 2020, states began to set up alert systems to inform policy decisions and serve as risk communication tools for the general public. Many of these systems included indicators based on an assessment of trends in numbers of reported cases. However, when cases are indexed by date of disease onset, reporting delays complicate the interpretation of trends. Despite a foundation of statistical literature with which to address this problem, these methods have not been widely applied in practice. In this paper, we develop a Bayesian spatiotemporal nowcasting model for assessing trends in county-level COVID-19 cases in Ohio. We compare the performance of our model with the approach used in Ohio and the approach included in decision support materials from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. We demonstrate gains in performance while still retaining interpretability using our model. In addition, we are able to fully account for uncertainty in both the time series of cases and the reporting process. While we cannot eliminate all of the uncertainty in public health surveillance and subsequent decision-making, we must use approaches that embrace these challenges and deliver more accurate and honest assessments to policy-makers.

[Paper URL](https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwac034)

[Download full-text here](http://EnhaoLiu.github.io/files/Journal_2022_AJOE_DKline_AHyder_ELiu_MRayo_SMalloy_ERoot.pdf)

<!-- Recommondation citation: 'Liu E, Allen TT, Roychowdhury S. Cyber vulnerability maintenance policies that address the incomplete nature of inspection. Appl Stochastic Models Bus Ind. 2019;35:1390–1410.' -->

